Add guide for debugging backend plugins (#26851)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/developers/plugins/backend/debug-your-backend-plugin.md

+++
title = "Debug your backend plugin"
keywords = ["grafana", "plugins", "backend", "plugin", "backend-plugins", "documentation"]

> type = "docs"

Reviewer: Please add `weight` metadata here.

+++

> # Debug your backend plugin

Reviewer: I'm not sure this title is accurate. From the title, I expected steps to follow to debug my plugin. The actual instructions seem to be for adding a debugger to the plugin, specifically Delve.

Author: "Configure Delve to debug your backend plugin"? @alexanderzobnin

This guide explains how to attach a debugger to a running backend plugin.

A backend plugin runs in its own process, separate from grafana-server. This makes it difficult to debug the plugin the same way you would debug the grafana-server process.

You can read more about the how plugin processes are managed in the [go-plugin](https://github.com/hashicorp/go-plugin#architecture) project page.

Fortunately, you can debug your plugin by attaching the [Delve](https://github.com/go-delve/delve) debugger for Go to the subprocess running your plugin.

> You can add more information available while debugging by building your plugin with additional flags.

Reviewer: Add an h2 here describing what this process is. This maintains consistency with the following h2 section and makes it easier for users to understand the document. In tech writing, we often call that a "signpost."

1. Disable compiler optimizations and inlining by adding `-gcflags=all="-N -l"` when you build your plugin.

   ```

>    go build -gcflags=all="-N -l" -o ./dist/my-datasource_linux_amd64 ./backend

Reviewer 2: I tried to get this running with the `grafana/azure-data-explorer-datasource` but did not manage to set it up according to the guide.

Some suggestions to improve it would be to add a debug build schema to the: https://github.com/grafana/grafana-plugin-sdk-go/blob/master/build/common.go

Any how I would love to jump on a call to get this working so I can give better feedback on how to make this guide a bit easier (foolproof) to follow.

Author: I think @alexanderzobnin would be the best one suited for this. I'd love to join to understand how to improve the guide.

   ```

1. Restart grafana-server or kill running plugin instance to restart plugin.

   ```
   pkill my-datasource
   ```

1. Attach to plugin process.

   ```
   dlv attach <pid>
   ```

> ## Run Delve in headless mode

Reviewer: I suggest adding a brief intro, perhaps explaining why we run Delve in headless mode rather than normal mode.

Author: @alexanderzobnin Do you mind elaborating on why the user would want to run Delve in headless mode?

1. Get the ID for the process running your plugin.

   ```
   pgrep my-datasource
   ```

> 1. Run Delve in headless mode. Delve will be listening on port 3222.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run Delve in headless mode. Delve listens on port 3222.
```

   ```
   dlv attach <pid> --headless --listen=:3222 --api-version 2 --log
   ```

Once Delve is running in the background, you can connect to it from your IDE.

> To connect to Delve from [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/), follow the instruction on [Debuggin](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/debugging) and use the following `launch.json`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To connect to Delve from [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/), follow the instructions in [Debuggin](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/editor/debugging) and use the following `launch.json`:
```
